So, um, here's the barcode for work lab.
NOTE CONF
Um, it's the same deal.
I can't connect my laptop with a different laptop, but
NOTE CONF
it still doesn't work.
Um, so you won't be able to see the lab
NOTE CONF
results, but you'll be able to take part anyway.
Um, so go to this URL or scan the code,
NOTE CONF
please.
Oh, really?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
It is.
NOTE CONF
Is it not working?
I don't see any participants yet.
NOTE CONF
Have you tried the barcode or the URL up here.
I don't.
NOTE CONF
Know.
Okay, so it must be a problem on my side.
NOTE CONF
Let's have a look.
Anyway.
NOTE CONF
How long do you think you can get rid.
Of.
NOTE CONF
This.
Pretty good.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Can you try now?
NOTE CONF
Oh, yes.
I can see 29 people.
NOTE CONF
Great.
All right, let's get started.
NOTE CONF
So today's lecture is going to be a bit different
in the sense it's not about language or anything like
NOTE CONF
that.
Not even about categories.
NOTE CONF
It's about decision making.
So the question is, you know, why would you be
NOTE CONF
interested in decision making and how does it relate to
the rest of the course?
NOTE CONF
Well, there's two things.
So one of them is that decision making obviously is
NOTE CONF
a, um, a cognitive task that we face every day.
Right?
NOTE CONF
We get up, we decide whether to have tea or
coffee for breakfast and so on.
NOTE CONF
So there's decisions, lots of decisions every day for all
of us.
NOTE CONF
And it's not even just humans, right?
Animals make decisions all the time.
NOTE CONF
Should they, should they run away or should they fight
and so on.
NOTE CONF
And so that obviously is an interesting object of study.
How do these decisions get made?
NOTE CONF
What are the factors.
What are the mechanisms.
NOTE CONF
And so on.
So we look at that.
NOTE CONF
Um, decisions also have traditionally played a big role in
economics.
NOTE CONF
So where classical economics has assumed that humans are rational
agents and they behave in an optimal way to do
NOTE CONF
with, I don't know, maximising the benefit for themselves or
maximising their profit and so on.
NOTE CONF
And then in the in the 60s and 70s, psychologists
actually started to look at economic decisions.
NOTE CONF
Should I invest or not?
Um, and they found that people aren't rational in, in
NOTE CONF
many ways.
And this is actually a new, relatively new branch of
NOTE CONF
economics called behavioural economics.
And we'll actually meet a bunch of psychologists who who
NOTE CONF
were involved in starting this, in particular Daniel Kahneman, who
you might have heard of.
NOTE CONF
He was a behavioural scientist studying human decision making.
And actually, he died last year.
NOTE CONF
He's also he was a Nobel Prize winner in economics,
actually.
NOTE CONF
And people like Herbert Simon, who is an AI pioneer
but who was also interested in decision making.
NOTE CONF
So that's the one thing decisions are interested.
Interesting decisions have an important effect in economics, for example,
NOTE CONF
where economic outcomes are the sum of lots of individual
decisions.
NOTE CONF
But there's this other aspect that sometimes humans behave in
a way that is maybe not expected, right?
NOTE CONF
So far we talked about rules.
These might be logical rules or might be grammatical rules.
NOTE CONF
We talked about probabilities.
This is Bayes rule or this is conditional probability.
NOTE CONF
And probability obviously tells you how to behave in some
some sense.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Bayes rule is a rule for decision making ultimately.
NOTE CONF
But it turns out that in many ways humans do
not behave in this optimal, rational, ideal way.
NOTE CONF
And that, again, is something that is an interesting thing
to study.
NOTE CONF
And so we'll talk about that as well.
And that goes under the moniker of cognitive biases.
NOTE CONF
And you might have heard about I don't know, the
framing effect or the confirmation bias and stuff like this.
NOTE CONF
So we'll talk about biases like this, which people have
also studied quite extensively.
NOTE CONF
All right.
But let's start with some simple examples.
NOTE CONF
So judgement is sort of judgement is the process that
leads to decision making right.
NOTE CONF
So how do you what kind of evidence do you
bring to bear.
NOTE CONF
And as I've tried to explain, there's decisions all the
time for all of us.
NOTE CONF
For example next next semester.
Which courses should you take?
NOTE CONF
Right.
So it's an option of of course it's in second
NOTE CONF
year.
How do you decide if you play a game chess
NOTE CONF
go and so on.
There's huge decision space right.
NOTE CONF
Lots of possible moves.
How do you decide or just simple things to go
NOTE CONF
to to the shop to buy headphones?
The nicer ones are more expensive.
NOTE CONF
Is it worth paying the extra money?
That's another decision.
NOTE CONF
Uh, which factors come into the decision.
So risk for example or reward.
NOTE CONF
So some decisions are risky.
Let's say we're organising a rescue mission.
NOTE CONF
Um there's the risk that more people get injured or
die.
NOTE CONF
But there's obviously also the reward that we rescue, the
people we're trying to rescue.
NOTE CONF
How do you weigh up these things?
Uh, I don't know.
NOTE CONF
The brown thing in the back of your fridge is.
Is it edible?
NOTE CONF
Is it worth eating?
Uh, in in in a game or in a lottery
NOTE CONF
or in a prize draw?
How do you decide?
NOTE CONF
Is this a good, uh.
Is this a good lottery to play?
NOTE CONF
Is it worth making a bet?
And so on.
NOTE CONF
These are sort of fairly isolated artificial types of decisions,
lotteries, for example.
NOTE CONF
And psychologists and economists, they have studied decision making often
in that setup where there's a the odds of winning
NOTE CONF
are this.
And what is your decision.
NOTE CONF
Do you play or not for example, which is sort
of nice in a laboratory setting, but maybe it doesn't
NOTE CONF
generalise to real life always.
It's also important to note that the information we base
NOTE CONF
our decisions on are often uncertain, right?
The environment we operate in.
NOTE CONF
So if I get ill and I ate some food
beforehand, how certain can I be that that's causing it?
NOTE CONF
It's food poisoning rather than something else.
Um, if we're, I don't know, doing a drug trial,
NOTE CONF
for example, how do we figure out if the drug
is effective and nothing will be 100% effective?
NOTE CONF
And there would always be exceptions.
There would be side effects and so on.
NOTE CONF
So things are uncertain.
Uh, people don't always tell you what they think.
NOTE CONF
So I give a presentation.
Do people like it?
NOTE CONF
You know, they say nice things, but do they actually
mean it?
NOTE CONF
Um, if I recognise and try to recognise an animal's
or even perceptual decisions like that.
NOTE CONF
Is that a dog or a cat?
Right.
NOTE CONF
Remember categorisation from Tuesday?
Sometimes it's fuzzy.
NOTE CONF
Sometimes it's uncertain.
So that's the environment in which decision making happens.
NOTE CONF
And so the aim now is to understand, explain ideally
even predict human behaviour in these settings, in these settings
NOTE CONF
of risk and reward that need to be traded off
in the setting of an uncertain environment where I have
NOTE CONF
some information, but maybe I don't have complete information or
the information isn't entirely reliable.
NOTE CONF
And in this context, I'd like to introduce a framework
that has become quite popular in cognitive science over the
NOTE CONF
last 20 years or so.
It's called rational analysis.
NOTE CONF
And the name is slightly misleading because the claim isn't
that human behaviour is always rational and always optimal.
NOTE CONF
But the claim is that thinking about behaviour in this
way is a useful way of thinking, right?
NOTE CONF
So if I sit down and I want to analyse
decisions under uncertainty, then I would say I don't know
NOTE CONF
The optimal strategy would be to maximise the expected gain
or something like that.
NOTE CONF
We'll come to that particular claim.
So that would be sort of the optimal rational, uh,
NOTE CONF
rational strategy.
And then I can study whether people actually apply that
NOTE CONF
strategy or do they diverge from it in a systematic
way.
NOTE CONF
And that is interesting.
That is then something I can study separately, I can
NOTE CONF
maybe formalise.
And the the rational analysis is sort of the assumption
NOTE CONF
that people are optimal or trying to be optimal.
And then you can study is that actually the case.
NOTE CONF
How do they deviate.
Maybe it's because of uncertainty.
NOTE CONF
Maybe it's because of limited memory and so on.
So we can explain that divergence then.
NOTE CONF
So this is the overall approach.
This is a framework.
NOTE CONF
If you remember the first was it the first or
the second lecture?
NOTE CONF
I think the second lecture where we talked about um
the taxonomy of cognitive analysis Uh, that was due to,
NOTE CONF
uh, Andrea and land.
If I remember correctly, where they had a framework, they
NOTE CONF
had a theory, they had implementation and so on.
So what we're talking about in terms of rational analysis,
NOTE CONF
this is a framework.
This is a meta theory in which you can develop
NOTE CONF
theories okay.
And this was the wrong.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So rational analysis goes back to John Anderson who developed
NOTE CONF
this in the 90s.
And he spelled it out.
NOTE CONF
But also he actually developed a computational, um, it's sort
of a platform, a computational platform in which you can
NOTE CONF
build, uh, cognitive models.
This platform is called actor.
NOTE CONF
You won't this won't be covered in this course.
But if you take a computational modelling course, say in
NOTE CONF
third year That's something that you'll encounter there.
So it is both a theoretical framework, but also there
NOTE CONF
is actually a computational modelling environment behind it.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So as I said the the starting assumption is assume
what's the optimal way.
NOTE CONF
What's the rational way of of solving a problem.
So for example we minimise our errors in decision making
NOTE CONF
or we maximise some form of reward or utility.
It could be just financial gain right.
NOTE CONF
If it's if it's a financial decision okay.
So we specify these goals that our cognitive system is
NOTE CONF
um is trying to, to achieve.
Then we need to talk about the environment.
NOTE CONF
As I mentioned often these decisions that happen in an
uncertain environment where some of the information is not reliable
NOTE CONF
or is incomplete, um, and then we can figure out
what kind of assumptions this entails.
NOTE CONF
So for example, if we're interested in the frequency of
diseases, then maybe sickness is more frequently caused by by
NOTE CONF
food.
Remember this food poisoning example rather than by social interaction
NOTE CONF
or social interaction, can lead to transmission of viruses and
so on can also lead to sickness.
NOTE CONF
In perception we might make assumptions like light comes from
above.
NOTE CONF
That's almost always the case for humans, right?
And for example, in face perception, there's studies that show
NOTE CONF
if you light a face from from below and from
above, um, face perception becomes much more difficult.
NOTE CONF
So that seems to be an inbuilt assumption in communication.
People normally do say things in order to be informative
NOTE CONF
rather than to deceive or to mislead.
And then we also need to think about computational limitations.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So we started with this sort of rational assumption here
NOTE CONF
at number one.
Then we looked at the environment, which limits how rational
NOTE CONF
we can do.
We can be.
NOTE CONF
And we also need to look at computational limitations.
So we can probably not consider all possible hypotheses.
NOTE CONF
Right.
In particular, if it's a very large hypothesis space we
NOTE CONF
have limited memory as well.
We forget stuff all the time.
NOTE CONF
Perception comes with inaccuracies.
We don't always perceive things correctly and so on.
NOTE CONF
So there is that additional problem that we need to
take into account, which again might explain that sometimes our
NOTE CONF
decisions are not 100% rational.
And as I said, Herb Simon is one of the
NOTE CONF
other pioneers here.
And he says that rational behaviour is compatible with access
NOTE CONF
to information and the computational capacities that the the agent
or the organism possesses.
NOTE CONF
And he calls this bounded rationality.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So we are rational within reason, right within the bounds
of our memory and computational limitations, for example.
NOTE CONF
And so now we have made all these assumptions.
And now we can start to formalise this.
NOTE CONF
Right.
We can, for example, say okay we'll apply Bayes rule
NOTE CONF
or some other form of probability theory.
Today we'll look at simple things like uh, expected utility.
NOTE CONF
Um, and then we can see whether this behaviour, the
purportedly optimal behaviour corresponds to what we find experimentally when
NOTE CONF
we study humans.
As I said, this is a framework.
NOTE CONF
This is not a theory by itself.
It's a framework for building theory.
NOTE CONF
Sort of a meta, a meta, a meta theory in
some sense.
NOTE CONF
And then once you have worked this out and you've
written down a nice sort of mathematical formulation for your
NOTE CONF
theory, then you can think about implementation, right?
How do we build a computational model then.
NOTE CONF
And, um, yeah, as I said, Russian analysis itself is
not constrained enough to, to, uh, to be a theory.
NOTE CONF
And often also there's limitations that are not being made
explicit, in particular computational limitations.
NOTE CONF
Most people don't talk about memory limitations and things like
that.
NOTE CONF
And then yeah, we based on that, we can now
look at the differences between this optimal or rational behaviour
NOTE CONF
and the behaviour we see in real, uh, experimental participants.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Uh, there's other things that can go wrong.
People might make assumptions or have tacit expectations.
NOTE CONF
They might solve a different problem from what the experimenter
thinks they're doing.
NOTE CONF
The optimal solution might exist, but it might not be
computational feasible.
NOTE CONF
So that's again the limitations.
And, uh, some tasks maybe people are just not adapted
NOTE CONF
to because they're, uh, it's not a task that they
have encountered before.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So now with that in mind, we look at some
NOTE CONF
of these, uh, supposed deviations from rational behaviour.
And these are often called heuristics or biases in the
NOTE CONF
literature.
Um, so and they defined as departures from, uh, normative
NOTE CONF
rational theory.
So you say, you're saying, for example, according to Bayes
NOTE CONF
rule, you should behave like this according to conditional probability.
You should do this according to I don't know, minimum
NOTE CONF
description.
Length is something else we've encountered.
NOTE CONF
This should be the optimal solution.
But people behave differently, right?
NOTE CONF
So that would be something we need to explain.
And biases are a deviation from rational behaviour for example
NOTE CONF
from probability theory.
And heuristics are simple strategies that give you fast solutions,
NOTE CONF
maybe without considering all, all possible or relevant evidence.
Okay, so both types of things can exist.
NOTE CONF
So there is unfortunately a slight overloading of the term
bias here.
NOTE CONF
So we've talked about cognitive biases so far.
So if you remember we talked about word acquisition and
NOTE CONF
the I don't know mutual exclusivity bias or the whole
world whole word bias that helps children acquire words in
NOTE CONF
an uncertain environment.
So this is a different type of bias.
NOTE CONF
It's more like a heuristic that allows you to prioritise
certain certain hypotheses.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So in this case, for example, the hypothesis that a
NOTE CONF
new word refers to a new object rather than being
a synonym for another object you know already.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So, um, the, the biases that we've talked about so
NOTE CONF
far, they're sometimes called inductive biases, a bit like in
machine learning where algorithms have inductive biases.
NOTE CONF
Now we're going to talk about the cognitive biases by
which we mean the deviations from optimal or rational behaviour
NOTE CONF
okay.
So there's an ambiguity in the term here.
NOTE CONF
Unfortunately the the inductive biases are a bit related to
heuristics but not exactly the same.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So with that in mind here are some some of
NOTE CONF
these cognitive biases framing effect.
We'll talk about that today.
NOTE CONF
And then tomorrow we'll talk about the representative representativeness bias,
the availability bias and the base rate neglect.
NOTE CONF
And um we look at how these have informed models
of decision making.
NOTE CONF
And today we're looking at one particular model.
This is the model called prospect theory, which goes back
NOTE CONF
all the way to the 80s to work of Trotsky
and Kahneman on economic decision making.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And let's start with an example.
NOTE CONF
And this is hopefully.
So if you haven't signed up for War Club yet,
NOTE CONF
now's the time.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So you should be able to see the question now
on your device.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
Um, this is a simple Um, a simple lottery type
NOTE CONF
decision.
A game of chance.
NOTE CONF
Right.
You have two possible choices.
NOTE CONF
Option one is a 25% chance of winning 3,030.
And option two is a 20% chance of winning 45.
NOTE CONF
And I this is the wrong slide.
I'm so sorry.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
This is the first one.
NOTE CONF
Um, so option one is a sure win of 30,
and option two is 80% chance of winning 30, 45.
NOTE CONF
So which do you choose?
To.
NOTE CONF
So not everyone has voted yet.
Um, 30s.
NOTE CONF
Before we look at the results.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So I can't give you the results.
Uh, well, I'll give you the results because you can't
NOTE CONF
see them on the screen, so.
Option one.
NOTE CONF
65% of you have chosen option one.
I'm sure we know 30.
NOTE CONF
35% of you have chosen option two.
80% win or 45.
NOTE CONF
Um, so the correct answer, the normally normatively correct answer
is two actually, which is the one that only a
NOTE CONF
third of you have chosen.
Can anyone explain why they've chosen what they've chosen?
NOTE CONF
Just sort of show of hands.
Who would like to justify.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Down there.
NOTE CONF
Because if I chose the 80% one, I'd be so
much more upset if I got nothing.
NOTE CONF
Yes, that's a good point.
People like certainty.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Anyone chosen option two?
NOTE CONF
The expectation value is higher.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So if you just compute the expectation value, which is
maybe something you remember from, uh, when when you did
NOTE CONF
some probability theory, hopefully in high school or something like
that, you just multiplied the, the gain times the probability.
NOTE CONF
And this is actually slightly higher for option two.
So if you go in terms of expected value.
NOTE CONF
So how much am I going to win on average
with this bet.
NOTE CONF
Then bet two is better.
But most people choose bet one anyway, as your colleague
NOTE CONF
said, because it has this nice feel of a certain
win.
NOTE CONF
And that's that's definitely something to be happy about.
So that's already an indication that people are maybe not
NOTE CONF
super rational in decisions like this.
Let's look at another similar one.
NOTE CONF
So now the option one is 25% chance of winning
30, and a 20% chance of winning 45.
NOTE CONF
Now which one do you go for?
1 or 2.
NOTE CONF
So no more certain wins in this example.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Most people have voted.
Did.
NOTE CONF
So let's have a look.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So now the outcome is option 130% and option 270%.
So it's the other way around.
NOTE CONF
Why do people think that is.
Why do people like option two more.
NOTE CONF
Any any hands?
Yeah I don't know.
NOTE CONF
This is exactly the same as the first question.
It's still 20% plus likelihood one.
NOTE CONF
Yes.
It's the same thing.
NOTE CONF
So this is the same as the first question.
But this time there's no certainty.
NOTE CONF
So people are biased in this situation.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
That's the that's the that's a good explanation.
So now if we compute the expected value right.
NOTE CONF
Just multiply the probability times the the gain then that
is 7.5.
NOTE CONF
In option one and nine in option two.
So in terms of expected gain option two is clearly
NOTE CONF
better.
And because there isn't this bias towards going for the
NOTE CONF
certain option, which we had in the previous example, people
will go for the expected the expected gain.
NOTE CONF
I mean, also maybe because I explained it after the
first example that you can you can think about this
NOTE CONF
in terms of expected gain or expected utility.
All right.
NOTE CONF
So that was a really simple example.
And now let's look at slightly more complicated ones in
NOTE CONF
order to talk about the framing effect.
So for this we're using what's called the conjoint bet.
NOTE CONF
And this is Kahneman who invented this or well at
least published about it.
NOTE CONF
So now we have two beds together and things become
more complicated.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Because okay, one of them might be certain, but the
NOTE CONF
other one might not be certain.
And in this example, the problem is also that the
NOTE CONF
first bet is about wins, and the other bet is
about losses.
NOTE CONF
So now we can use this to study how people
trade off wins and losses.
NOTE CONF
Okay, this is our first bet.
And this time, you don't need to vote.
NOTE CONF
It's a sure win.
Of 240.
NOTE CONF
Or second choice 25.
25%.
NOTE CONF
Chance of winning 1,000.
And of course, 75% chance of winning nothing.
NOTE CONF
And in conjunction.
So you need to bet.
NOTE CONF
In both cases, the second bet is you have a
sure loss of 750, or you have 25% chance of
NOTE CONF
losing nothing.
And 75% chance of losing 1,000.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so this is, as I said, joint bet.
You need to make both beds.
NOTE CONF
And the first one is about wins and the other
one's is about losses.
NOTE CONF
Again we have a certain win and a certain loss.
Um, and uh, people then they have four outcomes, right?
NOTE CONF
They can do a and c a and d b
and c or b and d.
NOTE CONF
So these are the possible choices here.
The possible combined bets or joint bets.
NOTE CONF
And now the question is what do people do.
Right.
NOTE CONF
This is a more complicated situation.
And maybe people find it harder to work out the
NOTE CONF
expected value and so on.
So this is an example that is taken from this
NOTE CONF
paper by by Trotsky and Kahneman, which I've already said
as a reading for today.
NOTE CONF
This is a fun paper.
So have a look.
NOTE CONF
It's really old right from the 80s, but it's the
definition of a classical paper.
NOTE CONF
And it's what started prospect theory, which is still a,
you know, an important and influential theory in behavioural economics.
NOTE CONF
And it's also what won them the Nobel Prize.
Well, Trotsky had already died, unfortunately, when Kahneman got the
NOTE CONF
Nobel Prize.
Anyway, okay, so let's look at this scenario here.
NOTE CONF
So first of all, let's think about what we can
expect people to do.
NOTE CONF
So maybe they're computing expected values, just like we discussed
in the simple example of a single bed.
NOTE CONF
But maybe they're using something simpler, right?
They take the best, best case and the least bad
NOTE CONF
worst case.
So what would that mean here?
NOTE CONF
So the best best case would be you win 1,000
right.
NOTE CONF
So that's a lot of money.
So maybe people go for that.
NOTE CONF
And then the least worst worst case.
So here the worst case is you lose a 1,000.
NOTE CONF
So maybe then you go for this lose 750 because
this is certain.
NOTE CONF
But at least it's not the worst case.
That would be a possible heuristic.
NOTE CONF
Um, and uh.
Of course we can just ask people and see what
NOTE CONF
pattern we get.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
But let's quickly look at expected utility.
First.
NOTE CONF
That's the the third option here.
For both cases, they people choose the, uh the outcome
NOTE CONF
with the best expected value.
And just to formalise this with informally already talked about
NOTE CONF
this, let's have a bet that has a number of
outcomes or 1 or 2 to o n.
NOTE CONF
And then the expected utility is the sum over all
the outcomes of the probability of the outcome times the
NOTE CONF
utility of that outcome.
And utility is a function that um, we can basically
NOTE CONF
that's a parameter, right?
We don't have to define utility as, you know, the
NOTE CONF
direct monetary value initially.
That's what we're going to do.
NOTE CONF
But it turns out that's actually not a not the
correct definition okay.
NOTE CONF
So always the utility.
So the important question is how do we define, uh,
NOTE CONF
the utility of all.
Oh, let's assume it's simply the monetary value.
NOTE CONF
So the utility of losing 750 would be -750.
The utility of winning 240 would be 240.
NOTE CONF
And so if we have 25% chance of winning 1,075%
chance of winning nothing, then the utility would be 0.25
NOTE CONF
times 1000 plus zero point plus 0.75 times zero 250.
So that would be the expected utility of.
NOTE CONF
Um.
Option B here, right.
NOTE CONF
And so we can compute this for all the for
all the possible options.
NOTE CONF
Um, but we already saw that people maybe don't always
look at uh utility.
NOTE CONF
So for example, they like certainty even if it might
not be optimal in terms of expected utility.
NOTE CONF
Uh, also, if we are assuming this, then we're assuming
that, uh, it's sort of a linear function, right?
NOTE CONF
The utility grows linearly with the amount of money.
So that would mean a win of 1000 of 100
NOTE CONF
is ten times as good as a win of 10.
Right.
NOTE CONF
Is this actually the case and a win of, I
don't know, a million would be 100,000 times better than
NOTE CONF
a win of 10 and so on.
So do people actually make this assumption.
NOTE CONF
So that's one question.
Um, and if we think about it, we can see
NOTE CONF
that there's actually already reason, you know, just intuitively there's
reason to believe that maybe that's not the whole story,
NOTE CONF
right.
So people sometimes make decisions that are inconsistent with utility.
NOTE CONF
So for example insurance.
Right.
NOTE CONF
They want to spend a small amount of money to
reduce the risk of losing something.
NOTE CONF
Um, the.
As we've already seen a certain gain, a guaranteed gain
NOTE CONF
of 10 might be better than 50% chance of winning
20, even though the expected utility is the same.
NOTE CONF
Right.
It's 10 in both cases.
NOTE CONF
And if you look at studies of how happy people
are with their lives, then you can see as people
NOTE CONF
get richer, they get happier.
But it's not a linear function and flattens off at
NOTE CONF
some point.
Right.
NOTE CONF
If you, um, if you're a millionaire, then I don't
know.
NOTE CONF
The difference between 1 million and 10 million might be
big, but the difference between 100 million and 110 million
NOTE CONF
might not be so big.
Okay, so it seems to be that it's not a
NOTE CONF
linear function, expected utility in happiness, but it sort of
flattens off after a while.
NOTE CONF
But what about lottery tickets?
Right.
NOTE CONF
The the expected value of a lottery is always negative
because lotteries are designed so that the person who runs
NOTE CONF
the lottery wins.
But people play anyway.
NOTE CONF
So why is that?
That's so.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
This already sheds doubt until the simple assumption of expected
NOTE CONF
utility.
But let's go back to this example.
NOTE CONF
This was our example with the joint bet.
You have to choose one of A or b and
NOTE CONF
one of the C or d.
What do people actually do.
NOTE CONF
Well let's look at the.
Two choices A and D.
NOTE CONF
Right.
A is a sure win of 240.
NOTE CONF
And D is a 25% of chance of losing nothing.
75% of chance of losing a thousand.
NOTE CONF
That's actually what most people prefer.
In this study it's 73% of participants.
NOTE CONF
Um, and compare this to B and C.
B is 25% chance of winning 1,070%, 75% chance of
NOTE CONF
winning nothing and 25% chance of losing nothing.
75% chance of losing 1000.
NOTE CONF
So if we actually compute the expected utility, then the
expected utility of A is better than expected utility of
NOTE CONF
B and the expected utility of A of D.
Sorry, A is worse than B, and D is worse
NOTE CONF
than C.
So people actually in both cases for bet one and
NOTE CONF
bet two pick an option that's strictly worse than the
optimal one based on expected utility.
NOTE CONF
All right.
So now the question is why is this.
NOTE CONF
Um, however, if you actually give them the expected value
you say this bet is the follows is as follows
NOTE CONF
as following.
And the expected value is 240.
NOTE CONF
And this bet has an expected value of 250.
Then 100% of the people Choose the correct or the
NOTE CONF
normatively correct answer.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So if you give it, if you give people this,
then they choose A and A and C.
NOTE CONF
If you give people these numbers here in blue and
red as well, then they actually choose B and C,
NOTE CONF
right, rather than a and D.
So that means they're not normally computing a utility, right.
NOTE CONF
If you give it to them they use it, but
they don't sort of voluntarily use it.
NOTE CONF
If it's not given they might not compute utility okay.
So they they pick the worse options.
NOTE CONF
And this doesn't seem to depend on the utility function
in the paper by trust and Kahneman.
NOTE CONF
There's other examples where we see this behaviour.
Also it's a question in terms of you can rescue
NOTE CONF
300 people with 25% chance, or you can rescue 600
people with a 10% chance.
NOTE CONF
So questions like this, you get the same outcome.
So and the theory that they're advancing is called prospect
NOTE CONF
theory.
And it explains things in a number of ways with
NOTE CONF
a number of assumptions.
So there's three key ideas that you need to need
NOTE CONF
to assume.
So first of all, uh, we need to forget this
NOTE CONF
assumption that gains and losses are equally bad, right?
So, um, this sorry, I'm getting ahead of my time.
NOTE CONF
So this is called loss aversion.
Um, gains diminish more quickly.
NOTE CONF
Uh, losses are more important.
So if we draw this as a graph where we
NOTE CONF
have the outcome here on the x axis and the
value on the y axis, then first of all, we
NOTE CONF
see it's not linear, right.
So the more we gain the less uh value we
NOTE CONF
attach to it, the less important it becomes.
This is the example of if if you have, um,
NOTE CONF
if you have 100 million, then, uh, gaining another 10
million, it's not going to be a big difference.
NOTE CONF
So this flattens out rather than being linear.
Right.
NOTE CONF
If it was just expected utility then this would be
a straight line.
NOTE CONF
And on the other hand the losses also flatten out
but less quickly.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So it's more linear here at least initially for the
NOTE CONF
losses.
So you can caricature this and say losses hurt more
NOTE CONF
than gains make you happy right.
If you lose the same amount then this hurts more
NOTE CONF
than winning the same amount makes you happy.
So let's assume, I don't know, 10 somewhere here, then
NOTE CONF
that makes you happy.
But uh, it's similar in terms of loss, but 100
NOTE CONF
is somewhere here, and the loss of 100 is worse
than the gain of 100.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And this is something that's called loss aversion, right?
NOTE CONF
You try to avoid losses.
Losses hurt more than than gains make you happy.
NOTE CONF
Uh, there's the the fact that they're not not linear,
neither gains or losses.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Otherwise this would be a straight line.
NOTE CONF
So instead it's a curve here.
The more you gain or the more you lose.
NOTE CONF
It loses its potency.
And then a third assumption that you can't read off
NOTE CONF
the the function here is that we overvalue improbable events.
And that's something we will come back to next time
NOTE CONF
that things that are very probable but somehow memorable, we
assign them a higher probability than we actually should.
NOTE CONF
Like plane crashes or winning the lottery?
Really unlikely, but also very shocking.
NOTE CONF
So it's our memory that is playing a role here
and is giving us a and making us overestimate the
NOTE CONF
probability of improbable events.
Okay, so how does this work in practice.
NOTE CONF
So first assumption diminishes diminishing value to gains and losses.
So if U is our utility function and u of
NOTE CONF
X is A is now not the expected value but
the subjective value right for us as human beings.
NOTE CONF
Then according to this, a win of 120 minus a
loss of 110 is a less a has lower utility
NOTE CONF
than a gain of 20, minus a loss of ten,
a gain of ten.
NOTE CONF
Right.
This is because these are larger amounts.
NOTE CONF
Right.
The difference is 10 in both cases here and here.
NOTE CONF
But here is larger amounts.
And if we go back to our curve here then
NOTE CONF
that means we are somewhere here.
So the extra 10 don't make a big difference.
NOTE CONF
But if we're looking at the right side of the
inequality, then we're somewhere here and the extra 10 make
NOTE CONF
a difference.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Because it's not a linear function.
So that's one thing that prospect theory assumes.
NOTE CONF
And the other thing is that, as I said, loss
aversion losses hurt more than gains.
NOTE CONF
So the utility of winning 100 is not the same
as the negative utility of losing 100.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So because with a 100 gain, we're somewhere here, let's
NOTE CONF
say.
And with a 100 loss we're somewhere here.
NOTE CONF
So it's a bigger.
Utility than the 100 gain.
NOTE CONF
And then the improbable events I already mentioned that.
So this is why people play lotteries, which is why
NOTE CONF
people take risky opportunities to avoid losses.
This is also gamblers have the tendency they've they've lost
NOTE CONF
a lot of money and then they take a really
high risk bet to win the money back.
NOTE CONF
Because the losses are the losses hurt much more than
than the gains.
NOTE CONF
And so they're willing to overestimate the probability.
In in the formulation of prospect theory they introduce a
NOTE CONF
weighting function pi uh to model this.
So this wouldn't be in wouldn't be part of the
NOTE CONF
utility function that we have here.
It's a separate mechanism that you need to assume.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So let's try to sort of test our intuitions.
NOTE CONF
Um regarding prospect theory.
So what kind of things would you want to.
NOTE CONF
Would you be able to explain.
And there's a short quiz.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So according to prospect theory which of the following statements
NOTE CONF
should be true.
So statement one if you have 1,000, then winning 10
NOTE CONF
is not a big deal.
If you have 20, then losing 10 is not a
NOTE CONF
big deal.
Losing 200 has a bigger effect than winning to 100.
NOTE CONF
If you have 1,000, you are prone to take a.
If you've lost 1,000, then you're prone to take a
NOTE CONF
risky gamble to win it back.
Or finally, people react more strongly to sure losses and
NOTE CONF
to sure gains.
So which of these is true according to prospect theory?
NOTE CONF
To be able to.
Do this.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
We have 41 votes.
NOTE CONF
Maybe a few more.
Give you another minute.
NOTE CONF
Okay, let's have a look.
Number one.
NOTE CONF
Um, 78% of you think that's correct.
If you have 1,000 in winning.
NOTE CONF
Uh, 10 is not a big deal.
Why is this?
NOTE CONF
Does anyone.
Would anyone like to explain?
NOTE CONF
So this is this idea that, um.
The value of of both gains and losses diminishes the
NOTE CONF
bigger they get.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So this is why our function here is not a
linear function.
NOTE CONF
So we will be somewhere up here where we've already
won 1,000 and then move a bit more to the
NOTE CONF
right.
It doesn't make a big difference in terms of our
NOTE CONF
perceived value or utility.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that's correct.
Number two.
NOTE CONF
Only 10% of you think that if you have 10,
then losing.
NOTE CONF
Sorry.
If you have 20, then losing 10 is not a
NOTE CONF
big deal.
So that means you would be somewhere here and then
NOTE CONF
you go down from 20 to 10.
This is where the curve is almost linear still right
NOTE CONF
in this small section here.
So that's not correct according to prospect theory.
NOTE CONF
Um, so it is a big deal if you're starting
at this small amount.
NOTE CONF
So that's correct.
Then the next one.
NOTE CONF
96%.
So losing 200 has a bigger effect than winning to
NOTE CONF
100.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
This is the loss loss aversion right.
So let's assume the 200 are somewhere here then losing
NOTE CONF
200 or somewhere here.
It's it can still get a lot worse right.
NOTE CONF
So losses hurt more than, than gains.
So that's also true according to prospect theory.
NOTE CONF
Then number four.
Um, if you have 1,000, then you are prone to
NOTE CONF
take a risky gamble to if you lost 1,000, then
you're prone to take a gamble to to win it
NOTE CONF
back.
That is not here in the diagram.
NOTE CONF
But is this assumption that people overweight improbable events and
because losses hurt a lot.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So we've lost 1,000.
NOTE CONF
Um, then we're willing to take this gamble even though
it's it might have a low probability.
NOTE CONF
Uh, this is helped by the fact that we overweight
improbable events, right?
NOTE CONF
I don't know, I'm in a casino, and I play
roulette, and I bet on number seven.
NOTE CONF
Then that's really, you know, one inch 36 or something
is the probability of winning.
NOTE CONF
But my loss has hurt a lot.
And I'm overweighting the the rare event of getting a
NOTE CONF
seven.
And so I go for the gamble anyway.
NOTE CONF
So that's also explained by prospect theory and the final
one.
NOTE CONF
People react more strongly to sure gains and sure losses
as we saw initially.
NOTE CONF
Anything that's sure is is good and people prefer it.
But at the same time, um, losses hurt more than
NOTE CONF
gains.
So, uh, that also predicts that people should find sure
NOTE CONF
losses even more.
Effective than short gains okay.
NOTE CONF
Because first of all, both things, let's assume both things
are certain then, given that losses hurt more.
NOTE CONF
Sure, losses are even even worse.
So that also follows from prospect theory.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
That was it.
NOTE CONF
So I have a short summary.
We looked at rational analysis as a framework for modelling
NOTE CONF
cognition.
The idea was basically you work out what would be
NOTE CONF
the rational behaviour.
So for example in the examples we've seen, the rational
NOTE CONF
behaviour would be to compute the expected value based on
probability theory.
NOTE CONF
It turns out that people don't behave in that way
if we give them actual decisions to make.
NOTE CONF
So rational analysis can be applied to human decision making
and shows where the two diverge, the actual behaviour and
NOTE CONF
the the supposed optimal behaviour.
And we've looked at some classic experiments.
NOTE CONF
So for example, the joint bets that we saw and
the way the problem is framed makes it makes a
NOTE CONF
big difference, right.
Whether I give people the expected value or I just
NOTE CONF
give them the probabilities.
We've seen that.
NOTE CONF
Losses and gains.
They don't grow linearly.
NOTE CONF
They flatten out after a while as the gains get
bigger or the losses get bigger, you care less.
NOTE CONF
Um, losses hurt more than than gains benefit you.
So they have a bigger effect than gains.
NOTE CONF
And we tend to overestimate the probability of rare events,
things like train crashes and lottery wins and so on.
NOTE CONF
And we've seen prospect theory, which I've not made mathematically
precise, but given you an intuition of how prospect theory
NOTE CONF
accounts for that sort of behaviour.
And if you look at the article by Trotsky and
NOTE CONF
Carol Monday, they explain it in more detail.
They give a lot more examples.
NOTE CONF
And we have two minutes for questions if there are
any questions.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
See you tomorrow.
NOTE CONF